
Main Content
ABC Home
OpenSitesmenu - use enter key to open and tab key to navigate
Log In
Search
ABC News 
SET LOCATION
for local news & weather
Just In
Politics
World
Business
Analysis
Sport
Science
Health
Arts
Fact Check
Other
Bushfire warnings
For the latest updates on bushfires, visit these websites: QLD RFS, NSW RFS and Emergency WA.
 Print  Email  Facebook  Twitter  More
A cauldron of extreme heat developing in WA is heading straight for the east coast bushfire zone
By Irena Ceranic
Updated 32 minutes ago

Space to play or pause, M to mute, left and right arrows to seek, up and down arrows for volume.
VIDEO: A mass of heat will be generated in WA over the weekend (ABC News)
A build-up of intense heat that will see temperatures in WA soar into the mid 40s this weekend will be dragged across the country next week, right into parts of New South Wales and Queensland devastated by bushfires this week.

Key points:
Four lives and hundreds of homes have been lost in NSW and Queensland fires
Milder temperatures should provide some relief for NSW in the coming days
But intense heat from WA is likely to be dragged across the country next week
The NSW and Queensland bushfires have already burnt through more than a million hectares of land, killing four people and destroying more than 300 homes.

Bureau of Meteorology spokesman Neil Bennett said milder temperatures were expected to provide some relief to parts of NSW where fires continue to burn over the next few days, but the bushfire threat was far from over with the heat expected to ramp up again.

The areas in dark red on the map below show parts of WA will bake in temperatures above 45 degrees Celsius over the weekend, before the hot air mass bears down on the east coast by Tuesday.

GIPHY: WA hot weekend weather map
"The problem that we have with the fires on the east coast is that there will be this break now … there are some cooler temperatures, but the heat from WA could push across over the course of the middle part of next week," Mr Bennett said.

While early forecasts suggest areas in eastern parts of New South Wales and south-east Queensland will nudge 40C by Tuesday, forecasters will keep a close eye on the winds to determine whether to issue fire weather warnings.

A firefighter watches as bushfires burn in Old Bar, New South Wales
PHOTO: The New South Wales and Queensland fires have burnt through more than a million hectares of land. (AAP: Darren Pateman)
This week a catastrophic weather warning was introduced across large parts of NSW — the first time such a high warning has been issued since it was introduced in 2009 following the Black Saturday Victorian bushfires.

All the ingredients for fires, except one
Mr Bennett said wind strength could prove the key as to how bad conditions would get on the eastern seaboard next week.

Space to play or pause, M to mute, left and right arrows to seek, up and down arrows for volume.
VIDEO: The science of bushfires explained (ABC News)
"When you have fire weather conditions that are dangerous, you need a combination of a few things — you need to have high temperatures, you need strong winds, dry conditions, low humidity and you also need to have dry vegetation," he said.

"The dry vegetation is there, if the air is coming across from WA it's travelling over land so it's dry, the temperatures are going to be warm, so all we then need to look at is what the winds are going to be like.

"If the winds start to pick up then we start to see a deterioration in the fire weather conditions as a result of that hot air starting to move across."


EMBED: Live wind map for Western Australia
On Tuesday the catastrophic fire warning was issued in part due to a strong cold front which brought a rapid wind change.

The WA cauldron
The extreme heat brewing in WA could see November records tumble over the weekend.

Be prepared for the heat
Be prepared for the heat
Heatwaves kill far more people than other natural disasters. ABC Emergency has a checklist of things you can do to be ready.
"We are going to see a number of places away from the west coast getting very warm temperatures and in some parts approaching records for November," Mr Bennett said.

"[It is] all because of a high pressure system that's sitting in the Bight that is going to direct hot north-easterly air over the region."

Perth is in the midst of a hot spell, with a string of four days over 35C expected — a phenomenon that has not happened in November since 1933.

The city will cool on Sunday as a trough along the west coast starts to move inland, pushing the heat to eastern parts of the state.

A maximum of 44C is forecast for Kalgoorlie on Sunday, which could topple the city's current record of 43.7C that was reached on November 24, 1923.

The outline of the sun shimmers in a heat haze
PHOTO: Temperatures are forecast to soar in Western Australia this weekend. (Will Burgess, file photo: Reuters)
The source of the blistering heat, which is being dragged across the southern half of WA and interstate, is the tropical north of WA where monsoon rainfall activity is yet to begin.

"That's something that will continue until we can get some relief in the form of any significant tropical activity," Mr Bennett said.

"There's nothing on the horizon for that, certainly over the next week, so we will probably get these very hot conditions on and off now until we can start to see the monsoon [trough] really building.

"[That] may not typically occur until middle to late December."

Topics: weather, bushfire, perth-6000, wa

First posted about an hour ago

 Print  Email  Facebook  Twitter  More
More stories from Western Australia

Plan for a Bushfire
Plan for a Heatwave
TOP STORIES
A cauldron of extreme heat developing in WA is heading straight for the east coast fire zone
Are bigger water-bombers the answer to Australia's bushfire woes?
Elders call for gun ban in communities after Kumanjayi Walker death
When it comes to sexual attraction, we’re a nation sharply divided
Bushfires have destroyed more than 250 homes in NSW this week, the RFS says
Opinion: The three factors that demand Scott Morrison rethink his approach to climate change (photos)
SPORT Why the Sun Yang case is a watershed moment for sport
Debby wasn't born into privilege, but she was determined to 'prove the buggers wrong' (photos)
Refugee Behrouz Boochani has left PNG and doesn't plan on returning
SPORT Ash Barty has a secret weapon — and he can help us ordinary mortals, too
Queensland bushfire threat to intensify today, BOM warns
'We cannot trust anyone': Inside the world's largest refugee camp
It was labelled financially risky, but Carnegie still got $2.6m from WA taxpayers, documents show (photos)
Indigenous newborns being removed from mothers in 'unethical' ways, report finds
SPORT Opinion: Are the mental health challenges young athletes face too great?
A potential culprit has been found in the vaping illness outbreak. What now?
'Devastating' loss of Qld icon — Weis Bar factory to close
Analysis: The two small patches of hair that speak volumes about us
The Crown recreates (and spins) history in its biggest leap across time yet
Arrows, petrol bombs used against police as protests paralyse Hong Kong
Corporate undertakers warn there are bad times ahead
Two dead in California attack, marking the 85th school shooting in the US this year
SPORT 'He just wouldn't shut up': Ben Stokes reveals David Warner sledges spurred his Headingley heroics
Will you sail through our news quiz or sink like a submarine?
'Unethical and illegal': Estate agency's photos of Sydney flat look nothing like the real thing
Aboriginal man left 'stunned' after being sent racist letter in Adelaide
Chilean-Australians who lived through the Pinochet era 'don't want to ever go back'
Get the headlines to your mobile. NEWS on Messenger.
CONNECT WITH ABC NEWS
ABC News on FacebookABC News on InstagramABC News on TwitterABC News on YouTubeABC News on Apple News
News Podcasts
GOT A NEWS TIP?
If you have inside knowledge of a topic in the news, contact the ABC.

ABC BACKSTORY
ABC teams share the story behind the story and insights into the making of digital, TV and radio content.

EDITORIAL POLICIES
Read about our editorial guiding principles and the standards ABC journalists and content makers follow.

Learn more

FEATURES
Lightning flashes at night, silhouetting a windmill. 
Your best photos for the week ending November 15, 2019
Your best photos for the week ending November 15, 2019.

Dozens of arrows representing different direction and speed winds sit over a map of New South Wales.
How winds affect bushfire conditions
See what the winds are doing now in the areas around the country that are being impacted by bushfires.

Jo Wright embraces her 2-year-old son Philip at their home in Western Sydney.
Viagra in the birthing suite
The drug could dramatically reduce emergency caesareans after foetal distress.

A woman stands in front of the shoreline on King Island
New King Island abattoir to beef up industry
King Island — a remote parcel of land halfway between Tasmania and Victoria — is building a reputation for award-winning cheeses and golf courses, but it's beef that keeps the community going.

TOP STORIES
A cauldron of extreme heat developing in WA is heading straight for the east coast fire zone
Are bigger water-bombers the answer to Australia's bushfire woes?
Elders call for gun ban in communities after Kumanjayi Walker death
When it comes to sexual attraction, we’re a nation sharply divided
Bushfires have destroyed more than 250 homes in NSW this week, the RFS says
Opinion: The three factors that demand Scott Morrison rethink his approach to climate change
Why the Sun Yang case is a watershed moment for sport
Debby wasn't born into privilege, but she was determined to 'prove the buggers wrong'
Refugee Behrouz Boochani has left PNG and doesn't plan on returning
Ash Barty has a secret weapon — and he can help us ordinary mortals, too
JUST IN
'He just wouldn't shut up': Ben Stokes reveals David Warner sledges spurred his Headingley heroics
The three factors that demand Scott Morrison rethink his approach to climate change
It was labelled financially risky, but Carnegie still got $2.6m from WA taxpayers, documents show
There's a $20 billion super gold mine waiting to be claimed
Two dead in California attack, marking the 85th school shooting in the US this year
Bushfires have destroyed more than 250 homes in NSW this week, the RFS says
A potential culprit has been found in the vaping illness outbreak. What now?
'Devastating' loss of Qld icon — Weis Bar factory to close
Wall St flat as US-China trade dispute lingers
A cauldron of extreme heat developing in WA is heading straight for the east coast fire zone
MOST POPULAR
'Unethical and illegal': Estate agency's photos of Sydney flat look nothing like the real thing
'The most virulent form of plague' detected in China
The three-word slogan Trump hopes will save him from impeachment
Police officer charged with murder over teen's death in custody will plead not guilty
For just $40,000 you can build a home using the soil beneath your feet
Teen charged with starting Queensland bushfire, crews shore up defences as conditions ease (photos)
Meet the real Quiet Australians
'He was a good fella': Fourth NSW bushfire victim identified (photos)
The unexpected differences between renters' and owners' world views
This man duped an airline with a fat cat switcheroo, but went too far by boasting about it
ANALYSIS & OPINION
The three factors that demand Scott Morrison rethink his approach to climate change
The two small patches of hair that speak volumes about us
Are the mental health challenges young athletes face too great?
The three-word slogan Trump hopes will save him from impeachment
Aboriginal people feel under siege in their own homes
The unexpected differences between renters' and owners' world views
The inflammometer has hit 11, but politicians aren't finished yet
The earth's sixth mass extinction event is underway. So are humans to blame?
The uncomfortable truth about tech in Australian schools
I lost my home to bushfire and I don't understand why we still ignore the risks
SITE MAP
Sections
ABC News
Just In
World
Business
Health
Entertainment
Sport
Analysis & Opinion
Weather
Topics
Archive
Corrections & Clarifications
Local Weather
Sydney Weather
Melbourne Weather
Adelaide Weather
Brisbane Weather
Perth Weather
Hobart Weather
Darwin Weather
Canberra Weather
Local News
Sydney News
Melbourne News
Adelaide News
Brisbane News
Perth News
Hobart News
Darwin News
Canberra News
Media
Video
Audio
Photos
Subscribe
Podcasts
Newsletters
Connect
Contact Us
This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.

AEDT = Australian Eastern Daylight Savings Time which is 11 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)

Change to mobile view
Terms of UsePrivacy PolicyAccessibilityABC HelpContact the ABC© 2019 ABC